# Modeller commentary

## Summary comments on results
FILL

## Comments on observed dynamics given model assumptions
FILL

# Model assumptions

## Round 4 scenarios

### Waning of protection against infection
Continuous decrease using exponential law according to scenarios of Round 4.
For Round 4 the speed has been adjusted to cope with median instead of mean, which results in a slower waning.

#### Optimistic waning of protection against infection 
Remark: For the previous periods (especially Delta), optimistic waning results in a quite low pool of remaining susceptible, and the calibration is far more difficult.

#### Pessimistic waning of protection against infection
Remark: This hypothesis seems more in line with previous waves/variants than the optimistic waning hypothesis.

#### Any variation from the scenarios as specified

### New variants

#### Any variation from the scenarios as specified
Remark: Since the model only accounts for 2 variant at a time, there is each time a current variant (with less protection from old vaccines and previous infections) and a previous variant (with stronger protections). With the introduction of the new variant in scenarios B and D, the current variant is relegated to the status of previous variant, hence with better protection from previous immunity as an artefact coming from the model. Therefore, the model projects a slight decrease of the transmission of the previous variant once a new variant is introduced.

## Additional assumptions

### Age groups 
The model accounts for 10 years age groups, converted into 0-17, 18-59, 60+

### Vaccination
According to data available on March 14 from Sciensano, Belgian Scientific Institute of Public Health. The latest vaccination campaign takes into account old vaccines and new bivariant vaccines, which are incorporated in the model.

### Vaccine effectiveness
Fixed inputs on vaccine effectiveness
Vaccine type | Alpha Infection | Alpha severe | Delta Infection | Delta severe | Omicron Infection | Omicron severe
:---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | 
Adeno: 1st dose | 49% | 76% | 43% | 76% | 18% | 65%
Adeno: 2nd dose | 74% | 86% | 83% | 95% | 49% | 81%
mRNA: 1st dose | 48% | 83% | 72% | 79% | 32% |65%
mRNA: 2nd dose | 94% | 95% | 91% | 99% | 66% | 81%
Booster (mRNA) | - | - | 95% | 99% | 67% | 90%
2nd/3rd Booster original strain (mRNA) | - | - | 95% | 99% | 67% | 90%
2nd/3rd Booster bivariant (mRNA)  | - | - | 95% | 99% | 95% | 99%

New omicron variants (regrouped as ba4/ba5, bq1/ba2.75/xbb, xbb1.5) have their own reductions in vaccine effectiveness and protection from previous infections which are estimated by the model.

### Number/type of immune classes considered
Immune classes are the following ones: previously infected previous variant, previously infected current variant, 1st dose vaccinated (Adeno, mRNA), 2nd dose vaccinated (Adeno, mRNA), Booster vaccinated (only mRNA), extra Booster vaccinated without updated vaccine, extra Booster vaccinated with updated vaccine, "vaccinated and previously infected previous variant" and  "vaccinated and previously infected current variant".

All 1st dose, 2nd dose and booster dose classes are merged into a single classe "vaccinated and previously infected" after an infection, with no distinction on the number of doses.

#### Initial distribution of susceptibility 
Derived from the evolution from March 2020.

##### Proportion of people that are naïve at start of projection (not vaccinated or infected)
Derived from the evolution from March 2020.

#### Population ageing 
Not considered.

#### Assumptions on severity of infection of repeat infections
Not considered.

##### Other

### Seasonality implementation
Cf. contact rate

### Contact rate and/or behaviour assumptions
Contact matrices for the projection are based on contact matrices of the previous year at the same period (CoMix study in Belgium) in order to reproduce changes in contact patterns and closures due to holidays.
However, the transmissions parameters on top of contacts (proportionality factors) are kept for Round 4 as similar to the last period of calibration (and of February-March 2023) since they are mainly related to the current xbb1.5 variant and are very different than the ones estimated in 2022 for the initial omicron.

#### Non-pharmaceutical interventions
No new NPI considered here.

#### Behaviour in response to case notification rates
Not considered.

### Other
